Multicloud YugabyteDB (#18168)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/develop/multi-cloud/multicloud-setup.md

    masterip="127.0.0.1"
    basedir="/tmp/ydb-azu-"
    dataplacement="yes"
    status="yes"
    locations="azu.us-east-1.us-east-1a,azu.us-east-1.us-east-1a">}}

<!--
## Destroy the universe

After exploring the multi-cloud setup locally, you can destroy the cluster using the following command

```bash
for node in {aws,gcp,azu}-{1,2} ; do ./bin/yugabyted destroy --base_dir=/tmp/ydb-${node} ; done
```
-->

<!-- END: local cluster setup instructions -->
{{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}} {{<setup/cloud>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}}

{{<note>}}
For detailed instructions on how to setup a Multi-cloud universe in YB Anywhere, see [Create a multi-cloud universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-cloud/).
{{</note>}}

<!-- END: YBA cluster setup instructions -->
{{</nav/panel>}}
{{</nav/panels>}}
<!-- end: nav tabs -->

## Multi-cloud application

### Scenario

Suppose that you have retail applications that do transactions and want it to be deployed closer to users who are in the `east` and `west` regions of the US. Both applications need fraud detection which needs to be fast.

### Deployment

> You can choose from a list of [design patterns for global applications](../build-global-apps/) for designing your multi-cloud applications using the following setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can choose from a list of [design patterns for global applications](../../build-global-apps/) for designing your multi-cloud applications using the following setup.
```

> As you want your retail applications to be closer to your users, you have to deploy them in the data centers at AWS-`us-west` and AZU-`us-east`. As both systems would need a fast fraud detection, and as the regions are far apart, you can opt to deploy your fraud detection infrastructure in `GCP` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you want your retail applications to be closer to your users, you have to deploy them in the data centers at AWS-`us-west` and AZU-`us-east`. As both systems would need fast fraud detection, and as the regions are far apart, you can opt to deploy your fraud detection infrastructure in `GCP` as follows:
```

![Central fraud detection](/images/develop/multicloud/multicloud-fraud-detection.png)

## Hybrid cloud

> Just as you chose `AWS`, `GCP` and `AZU`, you could choose to deploy your retail applications in your on-prem data centers and your fraud detection systems in the public cloud. See [Hybrid cloud](./hybrid-cloud) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as you chose `AWS`, `GCP`, and `AZU`, you could also choose to deploy your retail applications in your on-prem data centers and your fraud detection systems in the public cloud. See [Hybrid cloud](../hybrid-cloud) for more information.
```

{{<nav/tabs list="local,cloud,anywhere" active="local"/>}}

{{<nav/panels>}}
{{<nav/panel name="local" active="true">}}
<!-- BEGIN: local cluster setup instructions -->

## Set up VPC peering

{{<warning title="Remember">}}
Although for the current example, you **do not** have to set up VPC peering, for different clouds to be able to talk to each other, you need to set up multi-cloud VPC peering through a VPN tunnel.
{{</warning>}}

YugabyteDB requires a particular [set of firewall ports](../../../yugabyte-platform/install-yugabyte-platform/prepare-on-prem-nodes/#ports) to be opened for cluster operations.

You should use non-overlapping [Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classless_Inter-Domain_Routing#Further_reading) blocks for each subnet across different clouds.

All public cloud providers enable VPN tunneling across VPCs and their subnets to enable network discovery. As an example, see [VPN between two clouds](https://medium.com/google-cloud/vpn-between-two-clouds-e2e3578be773).

## Set up the multi-cloud universe

We are going to set up a 6-node universe with 2 nodes each in AWS,GCP and Azure.

### First cloud - AWS

> {{<setup/local

Reviewer: AWS steps not working quite right

{{<note title="Note">}} These nodes in GCP will join the cluster in AWS (127.0.0.1) {{</note>}}

{{<setup/local
    numnodes="2"
    rf="3"
    destroy="no"
    ips="127.0.0.3,127.0.0.4"
    masterip="127.0.0.1"
    basedir="/tmp/ydb-gcp-"
    dataplacement="no"
    status="no"
    locations="gcp.us-central-1.us-central-1a,gcp.us-central-1.us-central-1b">}}

### Third cloud - Azure

{{<note title="Note">}} These nodes in Azure will join the cluster in AWS (127.0.0.1) {{</note>}}

{{<setup/local
    numnodes="2"
    rf="3"
    destroy="no"
    ips="127.0.0.5,127.0.0.6"
    masterip="127.0.0.1"
    basedir="/tmp/ydb-azu-"
    dataplacement="yes"
    status="yes"
    locations="azu.us-east-1.us-east-1a,azu.us-east-1.us-east-1b">}}

## Destroy the universe

After exploring the multi-cloud setup locally, you can destroy the cluster using the following command

```bash
for d in {aws,gcp,azu}-{1,2} ; do ./bin/yugabyted destroy --base_dir=/tmp/ydb-${d} ; done
```

<!-- END: local cluster setup instructions -->
{{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}} {{<setup/cloud>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}}
<!-- BEGIN: YBA cluster setup instructions -->

> ## Set up instance VMs

Reviewer: Why not simply link to YBA page rather than duplicate setup here

Author: Probably that might be a better idea. Will first get the local cluster working correctly and then move this out

{{<nav/panel name="local" active="true">}}
<!-- BEGIN: local cluster setup instructions -->

{{<warning title="VPC peering">}}

> Although for the current example, you **do not** have to set up VPC peering, for different clouds to be able to talk to each other, you need to set up multi-cloud VPC peering through a VPN tunnel. see [Setup VPC Peering](../../../yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-cloud/#set-up-vpc-peering) for detailed information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although for the current example, you **do not** have to set up VPC peering, for different clouds to be able to talk to each other, you need to set up multi-cloud VPC peering through a VPN tunnel. See [Set up VPC peering](../../../yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-cloud/#set-up-vpc-peering) for detailed information.
```

    basedir="/tmp/ydb-azu-"
    dataplacement="yes"
    status="yes"
    locations="azu.us-east-1.us-east-1a,azu.us-east-1.us-east-1a">}}

<!--
## Destroy the universe

After exploring the multi-cloud setup locally, you can destroy the cluster using the following command

```bash
for node in {aws,gcp,azu}-{1,2} ; do ./bin/yugabyted destroy --base_dir=/tmp/ydb-${node} ; done
```
-->

<!-- END: local cluster setup instructions -->
{{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}} {{<setup/cloud>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}}

{{<note>}}
For detailed instructions on how to Multicloud in YBAnywhere, see [Create a multi-cloud universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-cloud/)
{{</note>}}

<!-- END: YBA cluster setup instructions -->
{{</nav/panel>}}
{{</nav/panels>}}
<!-- end: nav tabs -->

## Multicloud application

### Scenario

> Let us say that you have retail applications that do transactions and want it to be deployed closer your users who are in the `east` and `west` regions of the US. Both applications need fraud detection which needs to be fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you have retail applications that do transactions and want them to be deployed closer your users who are in the `east` and `west` regions of the US. Both applications need fraud detection which needs to be fast.
```
